Hear me, grave fathers, noble tribunes, stay.
For pity on mine age, whose youth was spent
in dangerous wars whilst you securely slept;
for all my blood in Rome's great quarrel shed,
for all the frosty nights that I have watched,
and for these bitter tears, which now you see
filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
be pitiful to my condemned sons,
whose souls are not corrupted as 'tis thought.
For two and twenty sons I never wept,
because they died in honor's lofty bed.
For these, tribunes, in the dust I write
my heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears.
Let my tears staunch the earth's dry appetite.
My sons' sweet blood will make it shame and blush.
O, earth, I will befriend thee more with rain
than youthful April shall with all his showers.
In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still.
In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow
and keep eternal springtime on thy face,
so thou refuse to drink my dear sons' blood.
O, reverend tribunes, gentle aged men,
unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death,
and let me say that never wept before,
my tears are now prevailing orators.
O, noble father, you lament in vain.
The tribunes hear you not.
No man is by, and you recount your sorrows to a stone.
Ah, Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead.
Grave tribunes, once more I entreat of you.
My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.
Why, 'tis no matter, man.
If they did hear, they would not mark me.
If they did mark, they would not pity me.
Yet plead I must, and bootless unto them.
Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones,
who though they cannot answer my distress,
yet in some sort, they are better than the tribunes,
for that they will not intercept my tale.
When I do weep, they humbly at my feet
receive my tears and seem to weep with me.
And were they but attired in grave weeds,
Rome could afford no tribunes like to these.
A stone is soft as wax, tribunes more hard than stones.
A stone is silent and offendeth not,
and tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn?
To rescue my two brothers from their death,
for which attempt the judges have pronounced
my everlasting doom of banishment.
O, happy man, they have befriended thee.
Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive
that Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?
Tigers must prey,
and Rome affords no prey but me and mine.
How happy art thou then,
from these devourers to be banished?
But who comes with my brother Marcus here?
Titus, prepare thine aged eyes to weep
or, if not so, thy noble heart to break.
I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.
Will it consume me?
Let me see it, then.
This was thy daughter.
Why, Marcus, so she is.
Ay me; this object kills me.
Fainthearted boy, arise and look on her.
Speak, Lavinia!
What accursed hand
hath made thee handless in thy father's sight?
What fool hath added water to the sea
or brought a fagot to bright-burning Troy?
My grief was at the height before thou came'st,
and now like Nilus it disdaineth bounds.
Give me a sword; I'll chop off my hands too,
for they have fought for Rome, and all in vain,
and they have nursed this woe in feeding life.
In bootless prayer have they been held up,
and they have served me to effectless use.
Now all the service I require of them
is that the one may help to cut the other.
'Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands,
for hands to do Rome service is but vain.
Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyred thee?
O, that delightful engine of her thoughts
that blabbed them with such pleasing eloquence
is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,
where like a sweet, melodious bird,
it sang sweet, varied notes, enchanting every ear.
O, say thou for her, who hath done this deed?
O, thus I found her straying in the park,
seeking to hide herself as doth the deer
that hath received some unrecuring wound.
It was my deer, and he that wounded her
hath hurt me more than had he killed me dead;
for now I stand as one upon a rock
environed with a wilderness of sea
who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,
ever expecting when some envious surge
will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
This way to death my wretched sons are gone.
Here stands my other son, a banished man,
and here my brother, weeping at my woes.
But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn
is dear Lavinia, dearer than my soul.
Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,
it would have madded me.
What shall I do, now I behold thy lifely body so?
Thou hast no hands to wipe away thy tears,
nor tongue to tell me who hath martyred thee.
Thy husband, he is dead, and for his death
thy brothers are condemned and dead by this.
O, Marcus.
O, son Lucius, look on her.
When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey dew
upon a gathered lily almost withered.
Perchance she weeps because they killed her husband;
perchance because she knows them innocent.
If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful,
because the law hath taken revenge on them.
No, no; they would not do so vile a deed.
Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
Gentle Lavinia, let me kiss thy lips,
or give some sign how I may do thee ease.
Shall thy good uncle and thy brother Lucius
and thou and I sit round about some fountain,
looking all downwards to behold our cheeks,
how they are stained, like meadows yet not dry
with miry slime left on them by a flood?
And in that fountain shall we gaze so long,
till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness
and made a brine pit with our bitter tears?
Or shall we cut away our hands like thine?
Or shall we bite our tongues and in dumb shows
pass the remainder of our hateful days?
What shall we do?
Let us that have our tongues plot some device
of further misery to make us wondered at in time to come.
Sweet father, cease your tears,
for at your grief see how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.
Patience, dear niece.
Good Titus, dry thine eyes.
O, Marcus, brother Marcus,
well I wot thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
for thou, poor man, hath drowned it with thine own.
Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.
Mark, Marcus, mark.
I understand her signs.
Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say that
to her brother which I said to thee.
His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,
can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
O, what a sympathy of woe is this,
as far from help as Limbo is from bliss.
Titus Andronicus,
my lord, the emperor, sends thee this word:
that if thou love thy sons, let Marcus, Lucius,
or thyself, old Titus, or any one of you,
chop off your hand and send it to the king.
He for the same will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
and that shall be the ransom for their fault.
O, gracious emperor.
O, gentle Aaron.
Did ever raven sing so like a lark
to bring sweet tidings of the sun's uprise?
With all my heart, I'll send the emperor my hand.
Good Aaron, will thou help to chop it off?
Stay, father, for that noble hand of thine
that hath thrown down so many enemies shall not be sent.
My hand will serve the turn.
My youth can better spare my blood than you,
and therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives.
Which of your hands hath not defended Rome
and reared aloft the bloody battle-ax,
writing destruction on the enemy's castle?
O, none of both but are of high desert.
My hand hath been but idle.
Let it serve to ransom my two nephews from their death.
Then have I kept it to a worthy end.
Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along,
for fear they die before their pardon come.
My hand shall go.
By heaven, it shall not go.
Sirs, strive no more.
Such withered herbs as these are meet for plucking up,
and therefore mine.
Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
let me redeem my brothers both from death.
And for thy father's sake and mother's care,
now let me show a brother's love to thee.
Agree between you; I will spare my hand.
Then I'll go fetch an ax.
I will use the ax.
Come hither, Aaron; I'll deceive them both.
Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.
If that be called deceit, I will be honest
and never whilst I live deceive men so.
But I'll deceive thee in another sort,
and that thou say ere half an hour pass.
Now strive no more!
What shall be is dispatched.
Good Aaron, send His Majesty my hand.
Tell him it was a hand
that warded him from thousand dangers.
Bid him bury it.
More hath it merited; that let it have.
As for my sons, say I account of them
as jewels purchased at an easy price,
and yet dear too, because I bought mine own.
I go, Andronicus, and for thy hand
look by and by to have thy sons with thee.
Their heads, I mean.
O, how this villainy doth fat me
with the very thoughts of it.
Let fools do good and fair men call for grace.
Aaron will have his soul black like his face.
O, here I lift this one hand up to heaven
and bow this feeble ruin to the earth.
If any power pities wretched tears, to that I call!
What, wouldst thou kneel with me?
Do, then, dear heart,
for heaven shall hear our prayers.
Or with our tears, we'll breathe the welkin dim
and stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds
when they do hug him in their melting bosoms.
O, brother, speak with possibility,
and do not break into these deep extremes.
Are not my sorrows deep?
Having no limit, be then my passions limitless with them.
But yet let reason govern thy lament.
If there were reason for these miseries,
then into limits could I bind my woes.
When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth o'erflow?
If the winds rage, doth not the sea wax mad,
threatening the welkin with his big-swollen face?
And wilt thou have a reason for this coil?
I am the sea!
Hark how her sighs do blow.
She is the weeping welkin, I the earth.
Then must my sea be moved with her sighs.
Then must my earth with her continual tears
become a deluge, overflowed and drowned.
For why my bowels cannot hide her woes,
but like a drunkard must I vomit them.
Then give me leave, for losers will have leave
to ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.
Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid
for that good hand thou sent'st the emperor.
Here are the heads of thy two noble sons,
and here's thy hand, in scorn to thee sent back
thy grief their sports, thy resolution mocked,
that woe is me to think upon thy woes,
more than remembrance of my father's death.
Now let hot Etna cool in Sicily,
and be my heart an ever-burning hell.
These miseries are more than may be borne.
To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal,
but sorrow flouted at is double death.
Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound,
and yet detested life not shrink thereat.
That ever death should let life bear his name
where life hath no more interest but to breathe.
Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless
as frozen water to a starved snake.
When will this fearful slumber have an end?
Now farewell, flattery.
Die, Andronicus.
Thou dost not slumber.
See thy two sons' heads, thy warlike hand,
thy mangled daughter here, thy other banished son
with this dear sight struck pale and bloodless,
and thy brother, I,
even like a stony image, cold and numb.
Ah! Now no more will I control thy griefs.
Rent off thy silver hair, thy other hand
gnawing with thy teeth, and be this dismal sight
the closing up of our most wretched eyes.
This is a time to storm!
Why art thou still?
Ha, ha, ha.
Why dost thou laugh?
It fits not with this hour.
Why, I have not another tear to shed.
Besides, this sorrow is an enemy
and would usurp upon my watery eyes
and make them blind with tributary tears.
Then which way shall I find Revenge's cave?
For these two heads do seem to speak to me,
and threat me, I shall never come to bliss
till all these mischiefs be returned again,
even in their throats which have committed them.
Come, let me see what task I have to do.
You heavy people, circle me about,
that I may turn me to each one of you
and swear upon my soul to right your wrongs.
The vow is made.
Marcus, take thou a head,
and in this hand the other will I bear.
Lavinia, thou shalt be employed in this.
Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy teeth.
As for thee, boy, go, get thee from my sight.
Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay.
Hie to the Goths and raise an army there.
And if you love me and I think it so
let's kiss and part, for we have much to do.
Farewell, Andronicus, my noble father,
the woefullest man that ever lived in Rome.
Farewell, proud Rome, till Lucius come again.
He loves his pledges dearer than his life.
Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister.
O, would thou wert as thou tofore hast been.
But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives
but in oblivion and hateful griefs.
If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs
and make proud Saturnine and his empress
beg at the gates like Tarquin and his queen.
Now will I to the Goths, and raise a power
to be revenged on Rome and Saturnine.
So so, now sit.
And look you eat no more
than will preserve just so much strength in us
as will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot.
Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands
and cannot passionate our tenfold grief with folded arms.
This poor right hand of mine is left to tyrannize
upon my breast, who, when my heart,
all mad with misery, beats in the hollow prison
of this flesh, then thus I thump it down.
Thou map of woe that thus must talk in signs.
When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating,
thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.
Wound it with sighing, girl; kill it with groans,
or get some little knife between thy teeth
and just against thou heart make thou a hole,
that all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
may run into that sink and, soaking in,
drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears.
Fie, brother, fie!
Teach her not thus to lay such violent hands
upon her tender life.
How now; has sorrow made thee dote already?
Why, Marcus, no man should be mad but I.
What violent hands can she lay on her life?
O, handle not the theme, to talk of hands,
lest we remember still that we have none.
Fie, fie, how frantically I shape my talk,
as if we could forget we have no hands
if Marcus did not name the word of hands.
Come, let's fall to.
Gentle girl, eat this.
Here is no drink.
Hark, Marcus, what she says.
I can interpret all her martyred signs.
She says she drinks no other drink but tears,
brewed with her sorrows, meshed upon her cheeks.
Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought.
In thy dumb action will I be as perfect
as begging hermits at their holy prayers.
Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
but I of these will wrest an alphabet
and by still practice learn to know thy meaning.
Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments.
Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale.
Alas, the tender boy, in passion moved,
doth weep to see his grandsire's heaviness.
Peace, tender sapling.
Thou art made of tears,
and tears will quickly melt thy life away.
What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife?
At that that I have killed, my lorda fly.
Out on thee, murderer; thou kill'st my heart!
Mine eyes are cloyed with view of tyranny.
A deed of death done on the innocent
becomes not Titus' brother.
Get thee gone.
I see thou art not for my company.
Alas, my lord, I have but killed a fly.
But how if that fly had a father and mother?
How would he hang his slender gilded wings
and buzz lamenting doings in the air.
Poor harmless fly that with his pretty buzzing melody
came here to make us merry, and thou hast killed him.
O, pardon, sir; it was a black, ill-favored fly,
like to the empress' Moor; therefore I killed him.
O, then pardon me for reprehending thee,
for thou hast done a charitable deed.
Give me thy knife; I will insult on him,
flattering myself as if it were the Moor
come hither purposely to poison me.
There's for thyself, and that's for Tamora.
Ah, sirrah!
Yet, I think, we are not brought so low
but that between us we can kill a fly
that comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor.
Alas, poor man; grief has so wrought on him,
he takes false shadows for true substances.
Come, take away.
Lavinia, go with me.
I'll to thy closet and go read with thee
sad stories chanced in the times of old.
Come, boy, and go with me.
Thy sight is young,
and thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle.